Preparing the future of AI

# Introduction 



Artificial Intelligence (AI) has the potential to help address some of the biggest challenges that society faces. **Smart vehicles** may save hundreds of thousands of lives every year worldwide, and increase mobility for the elderly and those with disabilities. Smart buildings may save energy and reduce carbon emissions. Precision medicine may extend life and increase quality of life. **Smarter government** may serve citizens more quickly and precisely, better protect those at risk, and save money. AI-enhanced education may help teachers give every child an education that opens doors to a secure and fulfilling life. These are just a few of the potential benefits if the technology is developed with an eye to its benefits and with careful consideration of its risks and challenges. The United States has been at the forefront of foundational research in AI, primarily supported for most of the field’s history by Federal research funding and work at government laboratories. The Federal Government’s support for unclassified AI R&D is managed through the Networking and Information Technology Research and Development (NITRD) program, and supported primarily by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), the National Science Foundation (NSF), the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Office of Naval Research (ONR), and the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA). Major national research efforts such as the National Strategic Computing Initiative, the Big Data Initiative, and the Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN) Initiative also contribute indirectly to the progress of AI research. The current and projected benefits of AI technology are large, adding to the Nation’s economic vitality and to the productivity and well-being of its people. A companion document lays out a strategic plan for Federally-funded research and development in AI. As a contribution toward preparing the United States for a future in which AI plays a growing role, we survey the current state of AI, its existing and potential applications, and the questions that progress in AI raise for society and public policy. We also make recommendations for specific further actions by Federal agencies and other actors. A Brief History of AI Endowing computers with human-like intelligence has been a dream of computer experts since the dawn of electronic computing. Although the term “Artificial Intelligence” was not coined until 1956, the roots of the field go back to at least the 1940s,3 and the idea of AI was crystalized in Alan Turing’s famous 1950 paper, “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.” Turing’s paper posed the question: “Can machines think?” It also proposed a test for answering that question,4 and raised the possibility that a machine might be programmed to learn from experience much as a young child does. In the ensuing decades, the field of AI went through ups and downs as some AI research problems proved more difficult than anticipated and others proved insurmountable with the technologies of the time. It wasn’t until the late 1990s that research progress in AI began to accelerate, as researchers focused more on sub-problems of AI and the application of AI to real-world problems such as image recognition and medical diagnosis. An early milestone was the 1997 victory of IBM’s chess-playing computer Deep Blue 3 See, e.g., Warren S. McCulloch and Walter H. Pitts, “A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity,” Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, 5:115-133, 1943. 4 Restated in modern terms, the “Turing Test” puts a human judge in a text-based chat room with either another person or a computer. The human judge can interrogate the other party and carry on a conversation, and then the judge is asked to guess whether the other party is a person or a computer. If a computer can consistently fool human judges in this game, then the computer is deemed to be exhibiting intelligence. PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 6 over world champion Garry Kasparov. Other significant breakthroughs included DARPA’s Cognitive Agent that Learns and Organizes (CALO), which led to Apple Inc.’s Siri; IBM’s question-answering computer Watson’s victory in the TV game show “Jeopardy!”; and the surprising success of self-driving cars in the DARPA Grand Challenge competitions in the 2000s. The current wave of progress and enthusiasm for AI began around 2010, driven by three factors that built upon each other: the availability of big data from sources including e-commerce, businesses, social media, science, and government; which provided raw material for dramatically improved machine learning approaches and algorithms; which in turn relied on the capabilities of more powerful computers.5 During this period, the pace of improvement surprised AI experts. For example, on a popular image recognition challenge6 that has a 5 percent human error rate according to one error measure, the best AI result improved from a 26 percent error rate in 2011 to 3.5 percent in 2015. Simultaneously, industry has been increasing its investment in AI. In 2016, Google Chief Executive Officer (CEO) Sundar Pichai said, “Machine learning [a subfield of AI] is a core, transformative way by which we’re rethinking how we’re doing everything. We are thoughtfully applying it across all our products, be it search, ads, YouTube, or Play. And we’re in early days, but you will see us—in a systematic way— apply machine learning in all these areas.”7 This view of AI broadly impacting how software is created and delivered was widely shared by CEOs in the technology industry, including Ginni Rometty of IBM, who has said that her organization is betting the company on AI.8 What is Artificial Intelligence? There is no single definition of AI that is universally accepted by practitioners. Some define AI loosely as a computerized system that exhibits behavior that is commonly thought of as requiring intelligence. Others define AI as a system capable of rationally solving complex problems or taking appropriate actions to achieve its goals in whatever real world circumstances it encounters. Experts offer differing taxonomies of AI problems and solutions. A popular AI textbook9 used the following taxonomy: (1) systems that think like humans (e.g., cognitive architectures and neural networks); (2) systems that act like humans (e.g., pass the Turing test via natural language processing; knowledge representation, automated reasoning, and learning), (3) systems that think rationally (e.g., 5 A more detailed history of AI is available in the Appendix of the AI 100 Report. Peter Stone, Rodney Brooks, Erik Brynjolfsson, Ryan Calo, Oren Etzioni, Greg Hager, Julia Hirschberg, Shivaram Kalyanakrishnan, Ece Kamar, Sarit Kraus, Kevin Leyton-Brown, David Parkes, William Press, AnnaLee Saxenian, Julie Shah, Milind Tambe, and Astro Teller, "Artificial Intelligence and Life in 2030," One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence: Report of the 2015-2016 Study Panel, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, September 2016, http://ai100.stanford.edu/2016- report. 6 The ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge provides a set of photographic images and asks for an accurate description of what is depicted in each image. Statistics in the text refer to the “classification error” metric in the “classification+localization with provided training data” task. See http://image-net.org/challenges/LSVRC/. 7 Steven Levy, “How Google is Remaking Itself as a Machine Learning First Company,” Backchannel, June 22, 2016, https://backchannel.com/how-google-is-remaking-itself-as-a-machine-learning-first-company-ada63defcb70. 8 See, e.g., Andrew Nusca, “IBM’s CEO Thinks Every Digital Business Will Become a Cognitive Computing Business,” Fortune, June 1 2016. (“[IBM] CEO Ginni Rometty is optimistic that the company’s wager on ‘cognitive computing,’ the term it uses for applied artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies, is the biggest bet the company will make in its 105-year history.”) 9 Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (3rd Edition) (Essex, England: Pearson, 2009). PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 7 logic solvers, inference, and optimization); and (4) systems that act rationally (e.g., intelligent software agents and embodied robots that achieve goals via perception, planning, reasoning, learning, communicating, decision-making, and acting). Separately, venture capitalist Frank Chen broke down the problem space of AI into five general categories: logical reasoning, knowledge representation, planning and navigation, natural language processing, and perception.10 And AI researcher Pedro Domingos ascribed AI researchers to five “tribes” based on the methods they use: “symbolists” use logical reasoning based on abstract symbols, “connectionists” build structures inspired by the human brain; “evolutionaries” use methods inspired by Darwinian evolution; “Bayesians” use probabilistic inference; and “analogizers” extrapolate from similar cases seen previously.11 This diversity of AI problems and solutions, and the foundation of AI in human evaluation of the performance and accuracy of algorithms, makes it difficult to clearly define a bright-line distinction between what constitutes AI and what does not. For example, many techniques used to analyze large volumes of data were developed by AI researchers and are now identified as “Big Data” algorithms and systems. In some cases, opinion may shift, meaning that a problem is considered as requiring AI before it has been solved, but once a solution is well known it is considered routine data processing. Although the boundaries of AI can be uncertain and have tended to shift over time, what is important is that a core objective of AI research and applications over the years has been to automate or replicate intelligent behavior. The Current State of AI Remarkable progress has been made on what is known as Narrow AI, which addresses specific application areas such as playing strategic games, language translation, self-driving vehicles, and image recognition.12 Narrow AI underpins many commercial services such as trip planning, shopper recommendation systems, and ad targeting, and is finding important applications in medical diagnosis, education, and scientific research. These have all had significant societal benefits and have contributed to the economic vitality of the Nation.13 General AI (sometimes called Artificial General Intelligence, or AGI) refers to a notional future AI system that exhibits apparently intelligent behavior at least as advanced as a person across the full range of cognitive tasks. A broad chasm seems to separate today’s Narrow AI from the much more difficult challenge of General AI. Attempts to reach General AI by expanding Narrow AI solutions have made little headway over many decades of research. The current consensus of the private-sector expert community, with which the NSTC Committee on Technology concurs, is that General AI will not be achieved for at least decades.14 10 Frank Chen, “AI, Deep Learning, and Machine Learning: A Primer,” Andreessen Horowitz, June 10, 2016, http://a16z.com/2016/06/10/ai-deep-learning-machines. 11 Pedro Domingos, The Master Algorithm: How the Quest for the Ultimate Learning Machine Will Remake Our World (New York, New York: Basic Books, 2015). 12 Narrow AI is not a single technical approach, but rather a set of discrete problems whose solutions rely on a toolkit of AI methods along with some problem-specific algorithms. The diversity of Narrow AI problems and solutions, and the apparent need to develop specific methods for each Narrow AI application, has made it infeasible to “generalize” a single Narrow AI solution to produce intelligent behavior of general applicability. 13 Mike Purdy and Paul Daugherty, “Why Artificial Intelligence is the Future of Growth,” Accenture, 2016, https://www.accenture.com/us-en/_acnmedia/PDF-33/Accenture-Why-AI-is-the-Future-of-Growth.pdf. 14 Expert opinion on the expected arrival date of AGI ranges from 2030 to centuries from now. There is a long history of excessive optimism about AI. For example, AI pioneer Herb Simon predicted in 1957 that computers  PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 8 People have long speculated on the implications of computers becoming more intelligent than humans. Some predict that a sufficiently intelligent AI could be tasked with developing even better, more intelligent systems, and that these in turn could be used to create systems with yet greater intelligence, and so on, leading in principle to an “intelligence explosion” or “singularity” in which machines quickly race far ahead of humans in intelligence.15 In a dystopian vision of this process, these super-intelligent machines would exceed the ability of humanity to understand or control. If computers could exert control over many critical systems, the result could be havoc, with humans no longer in control of their destiny at best and extinct at worst. This scenario has long been the subject of science fiction stories, and recent pronouncements from some influential industry leaders have highlighted these fears. A more positive view of the future held by many researchers sees instead the development of intelligent systems that work well as helpers, assistants, trainers, and teammates of humans, and are designed to operate safely and ethically. The NSTC Committee on Technology’s assessment is that long-term concerns about super-intelligent General AI should have little impact on current policy. The policies the Federal Government should adopt in the near-to-medium term if these fears are justified are almost exactly the same policies the Federal Government should adopt if they are not justified. The best way to build capacity for addressing the longer-term speculative risks is to attack the less extreme risks already seen today, such as current security, privacy, and safety risks, while investing in research on longer-term capabilities and how their challenges might be managed. Additionally, as research and applications in the field continue to mature, practitioners of AI in government and business should approach advances with appropriate consideration of the long-term societal and ethical questions – in additional to just the technical questions – that such advances portend. Although prudence dictates some attention to the possibility that harmful superintelligence might someday become possible, these concerns should not be the main driver of public policy for AI. Machine Learning Machine learning is one of the most important technical approaches to AI and the basis of many recent advances and commercial applications of AI. Modern machine learning is a statistical process that starts with a body of data and tries to derive a rule or procedure that explains the data or can predict future data. This approach—learning from data—contrasts with the older “expert system” approach to AI, in which programmers sit down with human domain experts to learn the rules and criteria used to make decisions, and translate those rules into software code. An expert system aims to emulate the principles used by human experts, whereas machine learning relies on statistical methods to find a decision procedure that works well in practice. An advantage of machine learning is that it can be used even in cases where it is infeasible or difficult to write down explicit rules to solve a problem. For example, a company that runs an online service might use machine learning to detect user log-in attempts that are fraudulent. The company might start with a large data set of past login attempts, with each attempt labeled as fraudulent or not using the benefit of would outplay humans at chess within a decade, an outcome that required 40 years to occur. Early predictions about automated language translation also proved wildly optimistic, with the technology only becoming usable (and by no means fully fluent) in the last several years. It is tempting but incorrect to extrapolate from the ability to solve one particular task to imagine machines with a much broader and deeper range of capabilities and to overlook the huge gap between narrow task-oriented performance and the type of general intelligence that people exhibit. 15 It is far from certain that this sort of explosive growth in intelligence is likely, or even possible. Another plausible extrapolation from current knowledge is that machine intelligence will continue to increase gradually even after surpassing human intelligence. PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 9 hindsight. Based on this data set, the company could use machine learning to derive a rule to apply to future login attempts that predicts which attempts are more likely to be fraudulent and should be subjected to extra security measures. In a sense, machine learning is not an algorithm for solving a specific problem, but rather a more general approach to finding solutions for many different problems, given data about them. To apply machine learning, a practitioner starts with a historical data set, which the practitioner divides into a training set and a test set. The practitioner chooses a model, or mathematical structure that characterizes a range of possible decision-making rules with adjustable parameters. A common analogy is that the model is a “box” that applies a rule, and the parameters are adjustable knobs on the front of the box that control how the box operates. In practice, a model might have many millions of parameters. The practitioner also defines an objective function used to evaluate the desirability of the outcome that results from a particular choice of parameters. The objective function will typically contain parts that reward the model for closely matching the training set, as well as parts that reward the use of simpler rules. Training the model is the process of adjusting the parameters to maximize the objective function. Training is the difficult technical step in machine learning. A model with millions of parameters will have astronomically more possible outcomes than any algorithm could ever hope to try, so successful training algorithms have to be clever in how they explore the space of parameter settings so as to find very good settings with a feasible level of computational effort. Once a model has been trained, the practitioner can use the test set to evaluate the accuracy and effectiveness of the model. The goal of machine learning is to create a trained model that will generalize—it will be accurate not only on examples in the training set, but also on future cases that it has never seen before. While many of these models can achieve better-than-human performance on narrow tasks such as image labeling, even the best models can fail in unpredictable ways. For example, for many image labeling models it is possible to create images that clearly appear to be random noise to a human but will be falsely labeled as a specific object with high confidence by a trained model.16 Another challenge in using machine learning is that it is typically not possible to extract or generate a straightforward explanation for why a particular trained model is effective. Because trained models have a very large number of adjustable parameters—often hundreds of millions or more—training may yield a model that "works," in the sense of matching the data, but is not necessarily the simplest model that works. In human decision-making, any opacity in the process is typically due to not having enough information about why a decision was reached, because the decider may be unable to articulate why the decision “felt right.” With machine learning, everything about the decision procedure is known with mathematical precision, but there may be simply too much information to interpret clearly. Deep Learning In recent years, some of the most impressive advancements in machine learning have been in the subfield of deep learning, also known as deep network learning. Deep learning uses structures loosely inspired by the human brain, consisting of a set of units (or “neurons”). Each unit combines a set of input values to produce an output value, which in turn is passed on to other neurons downstream. For example, in an image recognition application, a first layer of units might combine the raw data of the image to recognize simple patterns in the image; a second layer of units might combine the results of the first layer to recognize patterns-of-patterns; a third layer might combine the results of the second layer; and so on. 16 See, e.g., Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy, “Explaining and Harnessing Adversarial Examples,” http://arxiv.org/pdf/1412.6572.pdf. PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 10 Deep learning networks typically use many layers—sometimes more than 100— and often use a large number of units at each layer, to enable the recognition of extremely complex, precise patterns in data. In recent years, new theories of how to construct and train deep networks have emerged, as have larger, faster computer systems, enabling the use of much larger deep learning networks. The dramatic success of these very large networks at many machine learning tasks has come as a surprise to some experts, and is the main cause of the current wave of enthusiasm for machine learning among AI researchers and practitioners. Autonomy and Automation AI is often applied to systems that can control physical actuators or trigger online actions. When AI comes into contact with the everyday world, issues of autonomy, automation, and human-machine teaming arise. Autonomy refers to the ability of a system to operate and adapt to changing circumstances with reduced or without human control. For example, an autonomous car could drive itself to its destination. Despite the focus in much of the literature on cars and aircraft, autonomy is a much broader concept that includes scenarios such as automated financial trading and automated content curation systems. Autonomy also includes systems that can diagnose and repair faults in their own operation, such as identifying and fixing security vulnerabilities. Automation occurs when a machine does work that might previously have been done by a person.17 The term relates to both physical work and mental or cognitive work that might be replaced by AI. Automation, and its impact on employment, have been significant social and economic phenomena since at least the Industrial Revolution. It is widely accepted that AI will automate some jobs, but there is more debate about whether this is just the next chapter in the history of automation or whether AI will affect the economy differently than past waves of automation have previously. Human-Machine Teaming In contrast to automation, where a machine substitutes for human work, in some cases a machine will complement human work. This may happen as a side-effect of AI development, or a system might be developed specifically with the goal of creating a human-machine team. Systems that aim to complement human cognitive capabilities are sometimes referred to as intelligence augmentation. In many applications, a human-machine team can be more effective than either one alone, using the strengths of one to compensate for the weaknesses of the other. One example is in chess playing, where a weaker computer can often beat a stronger computer player, if the weaker computer is given a human teammate—this is true even though top computers are much stronger players than any human.18 Another example is in radiology. In one recent study, given images of lymph node cells, and asked to determine 17 Different definitions of “automation” are used in different settings. The definition used in the main text, involving the substitution of machine labor for human labor, is commonly used in economics. Another definition is used in the systems analysis setting in the Department of Defense (DoD): Automation means that the system functions with little or no human operator involvement. However the system performance is limited to the specific pre-programmed actions it has been designed to execute. Once the system is initiated by a human operator, it executes its task according to those instructions and subroutines, which have been tested and validated. Typically these are welldefined tasks that have predetermined responses, i.e., rule-based responses in reasonably well-known and structured environments. 18 Garry Kasparov, “The Chess Master and the Computer,” New York Review of Books, February 11, 2010. http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2010/02/11/the-chess-master-and-the-computer. PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 11 whether or not the cells contained cancer, an AI-based approach had a 7.5 percent error rate, where a human pathologist had a 3.5 percent error rate; a combined approach, using both AI and human input, lowered the error rate to 0.5 percent, representing an 85 percent reduction in error. 19 19 Dayong Wang, Aditya Khosla, Rishab Gargeya, Humayun Irshad, Andrew H. Beck, “Deep Learning for Identifying Metastatic Breast Cancer,” June 18, 2016, https://arxiv.org/pdf/1606.05718v1.pdf.  PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 12 Public Outreach and Development of this Report This report was developed by the NSTC’s Subcommittee on Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence, which was chartered in May 2016 to foster interagency coordination and provide technical and policy advice on topics related to AI, and to monitor the development of AI technologies across industry, the research community, and the Federal Government. The report follows a series of public outreach activities led by OSTP, designed to allow government officials thinking about these topics to learn from experts and from the public. This public outreach on AI included five co-hosted public workshops, and a public Request for Information (RFI). The public workshops were: x AI, Law, and Governance (May 24, in Seattle, co-hosted by OSTP, the National Economic Council (NEC), and the University of Washington); x AI for Social Good (June 7, in Washington DC, co-hosted by OSTP, the Association for the Advancement of AI (AAAI) and the Computing Community Consortium (CCC)); x Future of AI: Emerging Topics and Societal Benefit at the Global Entrepreneurship Summit (June 23, in Palo Alto, co-hosted by OSTP and Stanford University); x AI Technology, Safety, and Control (June 28, in Pittsburgh, co-hosted by OSTP and Carnegie Mellon University); and x Social and Economic Impacts of AI (July 7, in New York, co-hosted by OSTP, NEC, and New York University). In conjunction with each of the five workshops, the private-sector co-hosts organized separate meetings or conference sessions which government staff attended. Total in-person attendance at the public events was more than 2,000 people, in addition to international online streaming audiences, which included more than 3,500 people for the Washington, DC workshop livestream alone. OSTP also published a Request for Information (RFI) seeking public comment on the topics of the workshops. The RFI closed on July 22, 2016 and received 161 responses. Comments submitted in response to the public RFI were published by OSTP on September 6, 2016.20 20 Ed Felten and Terah Lyons, “Public Input and Next Steps on the Future of Artificial Intelligence,” Medium, September 6 2016, https://medium.com/@USCTO/public-input-and-next-steps-on-the-future-of-artificialintelligence-458b82059fc3. PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 13 Applications of AI for Public Good One area of great optimism about AI and machine learning is their potential to improve people’s lives by helping to solve some of the world’s greatest challenges and inefficiencies. The promise of AI has been compared to the transformative impacts of advances in mobile computing.21 Public- and private-sector investments in basic and applied R&D on AI have already begun reaping major benefits for the public in fields as diverse as health care, transportation, the environment, criminal justice, and economic inclusion. 22 At Walter Reed Medical Center, the Department of Veteran Affairs is using AI to better predict medical complications and improve treatment of severe combat wounds, leading to better patient outcomes, faster healing, and lower costs.23 The same general approach—predicting complications to enable preventive treatment—has also reduced hospital-acquired infections at Johns Hopkins University. 24 Given the current transition to electronic health records, predictive analysis of health data may play a key role across many health domains like precision medicine and cancer research. In transportation, AI-enabled smarter traffic management applications are reducing wait times, energy use, and emissions by as much as 25 percent in some places. 25 Cities are now beginning to leverage the type of responsive dispatching and routing used by ride-hailing services, and linking it with scheduling and tracking software for public transportation to provide just-in-time access to public transportation that can often be faster, cheaper and, in many cases, more accessible to the public. Some researchers are leveraging AI to improve animal migration tracking by using AI image classification software to analyze tourist photos from public social media sites. The software can identify individual animals in the photos and build a database of their migration using the data and location stamps on the photos. At OSTP’s AI for Social Good workshop, researchers talked about building some of the largest available datasets to-date on the populations and migrations of whales and large African animals, and about launching a project to track “The Internet of Turtles” to gain new insights about sea life.26 Other speakers described uses of AI to optimize the patrol strategy of anti-poaching agents, and to design habitat preservation strategies to maximize the genetic diversity of endangered populations. 21 Frank Chen, “AI, Deep Learning, and Machine Learning: A Primer,” Andreessen Horowitz, June 10, 2016, http://a16z.com/2016/06/10/ai-deep-learning-machines. 22 The potential benefits of increasing access to digital technologies are detailed further in the World Bank Group’s Digital Dividends report. (“World Development Report 2016: Digital Dividends,” The World Bank Group, 2016, http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/896971468194972881/pdf/102725-PUB-Replacement-PUBLIC.pdf.) 23 Eric Elster, “Surgical Critical Care Initiative: Bringing Precision Medicine to the Critically Ill,” presentation at AI for Social Good workshop, Washington, DC, June 7, 2016, http://cra.org/ccc/wpcontent/uploads/sites/2/2016/06/Eric-Elster-AI-slides-min.pdf. 24 Katharine E. Henry, David N. Hager, Peter J. Pronovost, and Suchi Saria, "A targeted real-time early warning score (TREWScore) for septic shock," Science Translational Medicine 7, no. 299 (2015): 299ra122-299ra122. 25 Stephen F. Smith, “Smart Infrastructure for Urban Mobility,” presentation at AI for Social Good workshop, Washington, DC, June 7, 2016, http://cra.org/ccc/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2016/06/Stephen-Smith-AI-slides.pdf. 26 Aimee Leslie, Christine Hof, Diego Amorocho, Tanya Berger-Wolf, Jason Holmberg, Chuck Stewart, Stephen G. Dunbar, and Claire Jea,, “The Internet of Turtles,” April 12, 2016, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/301202821_The_Internet_of_Turtles. PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 14 Autonomous sailboats and watercraft are already patrolling the oceans carrying sophisticated sensor instruments, collecting data on changes in Arctic ice and sensitive ocean ecosystems in operations that would be too expensive or dangerous for crewed vessels. Autonomous watercraft may be much cheaper to operate than manned ships, and may someday be used for enhanced weather prediction, climate monitoring, or policing illegal fishing.27 AI also has the potential to improve aspects of the criminal justice system, including crime reporting, policing, bail, sentencing, and parole decisions. The Administration is exploring how AI can responsibly benefit current initiatives such as Data Driven Justice and the Police Data Initiative that seek to provide law enforcement and the public with data that can better inform decision-making in the criminal justice system, while also taking care to minimize the possibility that AI might introduce bias or inaccuracies due to deficiencies in the available data. Several U.S. academic institutions have launched initiatives to use AI to tackle economic and social challenges. For example, the University of Chicago created an academic program that uses data science and AI to address public challenges such as unemployment and school dropouts.28 The University of Southern California launched the Center for Artificial Intelligence in Society, an institute dedicated to studying how computational game theory, machine learning, automated planning and multi-agent reasoning techniques can help to solve socially relevant problems like homelessness. Meanwhile, researchers at Stanford University are using machine learning in efforts to address global poverty by using AI to analyze satellite images of likely poverty zones to identify where help is needed most.29 Many uses of AI for public good rely on the availability of data that can be used to train machine learning models and test the performance of AI systems. Agencies and organizations with data that can be released without implicating personal privacy or trade secrets can help to enable the development of AI by making those data available to researchers. Standardizing data schemas and formats can reduce the cost and difficulty of making new data sets useful. 27 John Markoff, “No Sailors Needed: Robot Sailboats Scout the Oceans for Data,” The New York Times, September 4, 2016. 28 “Data Science for Social Good,” University of Chicago, https://dssg.uchicago.edu/. 29 Neal Jean, Marshall Burke, Michael Xie, W. Matthew Davis, David B. Lobell, and Stefano Ermon. "Combining satellite imagery and machine learning to predict poverty." Science 353, no. 6301 (2016): 790-794. Recommendation 1: Private and public institutions are encouraged to examine whether and how they can responsibly leverage AI and machine learning in ways that will benefit society. Social justice and public policy institutions that do not typically engage with advanced technologies and data science in their work should consider partnerships with AI researchers and practitioners that can help apply AI tactics to the broad social problems these institutions already address in other ways. Recommendation 2: Federal agencies should prioritize open training data and open data standards in AI. The government should emphasize the release of datasets that enable the use of AI to address social challenges. Potential steps may include developing an “Open Data for AI” initiative with the objective of releasing a significant number of government data sets to accelerate AI research and galvanize the use of open data standards and best practices across government, academia, and the private sector. PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 15 AI in the Federal Government The Administration is working to develop policies and internal practices that will maximize the economic and societal benefits of AI and promote innovation. These policies and practices may include: x investing in basic and applied research and development (R&D); x serving as an early customer for AI technologies and their applications; x supporting pilot projects and creating testbeds in real-world settings; x making data sets available to the public; x sponsoring incentive prizes; x identifying and pursuing Grand Challenges to set ambitious but achievable goals for AI; x funding rigorous evaluations of AI applications to measure their impact and cost-effectiveness; and x creating a policy, legal, and regulatory environment that allows innovation to flourish while protecting the public from harm. Using AI in Government to Improve Services and Benefit the American People One challenge in using AI to improve services is that the Federal Government’s capacity to foster and harness innovation in order to better serve the country varies widely across agencies. Some agencies are more focused on innovation, particularly those agencies with large R&D budgets, a workforce that includes many scientists and engineers, a culture of innovation and experimentation, and strong ongoing collaborations with private-sector innovators. Many also have organizations that are specifically tasked with supporting high-risk, high-return research (e.g., the advanced research projects agencies in the Departments of Defense and Energy, as well as the Intelligence Community), and fund R&D across the full range from basic research to advanced development. Other agencies like the NSF have research and development as their primary mission. But some agencies, particularly those charged with reducing poverty and increasing economic and social mobility, have more modest levels of relevant capabilities, resources, and expertise. 30 For example, while the National Institutes of Health (NIH) has an R&D budget of more than $30 billion, the Department of Labor’s R&D budget is only $14 million. This limits the Department of Labor’s capacity to explore applications of AI, such as applying AI-based “digital tutor” technology to increase the skills and incomes of non-college educated workers. DARPA’s “Education Dominance” program serves as an example of AI’s potential to fulfill and accelerate agency priorities. DARPA, intending to reduce from years to months the time required for new Navy recruits to become experts in technical skills, now sponsors the development of a digital tutor that uses AI to model the interaction between an expert and a novice. An evaluation of the digital tutor program concluded that Navy recruits using the digital tutor to become IT systems administrators frequently outperform Navy experts with 7-10 years of experience in both written tests of knowledge and real-world problem solving.31 Preliminary evidence based on digital tutor pilot projects also suggests that workers who have completed a training program that uses the digital tutor are more likely to get a high-tech job that dramatically 30 Thomas Kalil, “A Broader Vision for Government Research,” Issues in Science and Technology, 2003. 31 “Winning the Education Future: The Role of ARPA-ED,” The U.S. Department of Education, March 8 2011, https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/arpa-ed-factsheet.pdf. PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 16 increases their incomes. 32 These wage increases appear to be much larger than the impacts of current workforce development programs.33 Ideally, these results would be confirmed with independently conducted, randomized, controlled trials. Currently, the cost of developing digital tutors is high, and there is no repeatable methodology for developing effective digital tutors. Research that enables the emergence of an industry that uses AI approaches such as digital tutors could potentially help workers acquire indemand skills. 32 The President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, letter to the President, September 2014, https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/PCAST/pcast_workforce_edit_report_sept_2014.pdf. 33 J.D. Fletcher, “Digital Tutoring in Information Systems Technology for Veterans: Data Report,” The Institute for Defense Analysis, September 2014. Recommendation 3: The Federal Government should explore ways to improve the capacity of key agencies to apply AI to their missions. For example, Federal agencies should explore the potential to create DARPA-like organizations to support high-risk, high-reward AI research and its application, much as the Department of Education has done through its proposal to create an “ARPA-ED,” to support R&D to determine whether AI and other technologies could significantly improve student learning outcomes. Recommendation 4: The NSTC MLAI subcommittee should develop a community of practice for AI practitioners across government. Agencies should work together to develop and share standards and best practices around the use of AI in government operations. Agencies should ensure that Federal employee training programs include relevant AI opportunities. PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 17 AI and Regulation AI has applications in many products, such as cars and aircraft, which are subject to regulation designed to protect the public from harm and ensure fairness in economic competition. How will the incorporation of AI into these products affect the relevant regulatory approaches? In general, the approach to regulation of AI-enabled products to protect public safety should be informed by assessment of the aspects of risk that the addition of AI may reduce, alongside the aspects of risk that it may increase. If a risk falls within the bounds of an existing regulatory regime, moreover, the policy discussion should start by considering whether the existing regulations already adequately address the risk, or whether they need to be adapted to the addition of AI. Also, where regulatory responses to the addition of AI threaten to increase the cost of compliance or slow the development or adoption of beneficial innovations, policymakers should consider how those responses could be adjusted to lower costs and barriers to innovation without adversely impacting safety or market fairness. The general consensus of the RFI commenters was that broad regulation of AI research or practice would be inadvisable at this time. 34 Instead, commenters said that the goals and structure of existing regulations were sufficient, and commenters called for existing regulation to be adapted as necessary to account for the effects of AI. For example, commenters suggested that motor vehicle regulation should evolve to account for the anticipated arrival of autonomous vehicles, and that the necessary evolution could be carried out within the current structure of vehicle safety regulation. In doing so, agencies must remain mindful of the fundamental purposes and goals of regulation to safeguard the public good, while creating space for innovation and growth in AI. Effective regulation of technologies such as AI requires agencies to have in-house technical expertise to help guide regulatory decision-making. The need for senior-level expert participation exists at regulating departments and agencies, and at all stages of the regulatory process. A range of personnel assignment and exchange models (e.g. hiring authorities) can be used to develop a Federal workforce with more diverse perspectives on the current state of technological development. One example of such an authority is the Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) Mobility Program, which provides for the temporary assignment of personnel between the Federal Government and state and local governments, colleges and universities, Indian tribal governments, federally funded research and development centers, and other eligible organizations. If used strategically, the IPA program can help agencies meet their needs for hardto-fill positions and increase their ability to hire candidates from diverse technical backgrounds. Federal employees serving in IPA assignments can serve as both recruiters and ambassadors for the Federal workforce. For example, agency staff sent to colleges and universities as instructors can inspire students to consider Federal employment. Likewise, programs that rotate employees through different jobs and sectors can help government employees gain knowledge and experience to inform regulation and policy, especially as it relates to emergent technologies like AI. 34 Ed Felten and Terah Lyons, “Public Input and Next Steps on the Future of Artificial Intelligence.” PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 18 Case Study: Autonomous Vehicles and Aircraft A relevant example of the regulatory challenges associated with an agency updating legacy regulations to account for new AI-based products is the work of the Department of Transportation (DOT) on automated vehicles and unmanned aircraft systems (UAS, or “drones”). Within DOT, automated cars are regulated by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) and aircraft are regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). The Promise of Autonomy The application of AI to vehicles and aircraft has captured the public imagination. Today’s new cars have AI-based driver assist features like self-parking and advanced cruise controls that keep a car in its lane and adjust speed based on surrounding vehicles. Experimental fully automated cars monitored by humans can already be seen driving on the roads. The consensus of experts is that automated surface vehicle technology will eventually be safer than human drivers and may someday prevent most of the tens of thousands of fatalities that occur annually on the Nation’s roads and highways. Automated vehicles also offer the possibility of greater mobility for the elderly and Americans with disabilities who may not be able to drive. First- and last-mile access to transit and other novel transportation approaches may provide communities isolated from essential services such as jobs, health care, and groceries unprecedented access to opportunity. A well-designed system of automated vehicles able to predict and avoid collisions may also significantly reduce transportation-related emissions and energy consumption. The Administration is taking steps to make this vision a reality, including the proposed $3.9 billion investment in the President’s Fiscal Year (FY) 2017 Budget by the Department of Transportation in automated and connected vehicle research, development, and deployment efforts, to ensure that the United States maintains its lead in automated vehicle technologies.35 35 “Secretary Foxx Unveils President Obama’s FY17 Budget Proposal of Nearly $4 Billion for Automated Vehicles and Announces DOT Initiatives to Accelerate Vehicle Safety Innovations,” U.S. Department of Transportation, January 14 2016, https://www.transportation.gov/briefing-room/secretary-foxx-unveils-presidentobama%E2%80%99s-fy17-budget-proposal-nearly-4-billion. Recommendation 5: Agencies should draw on appropriate technical expertise at the senior level when setting regulatory policy for AI-enabled products. Effective regulation of AI-enabled products requires collaboration between agency leadership, staff knowledgeable about the existing regulatory framework and regulatory practices generally, and technical experts with knowledge of AI. Agency leadership should take steps to recruit the necessary technical talent, or identify it in existing agency staff, and should ensure that there are sufficient technical “seats at the table” in regulatory policy discussions. Recommendation 6: Agencies should use the full range of personnel assignment and exchange models (e.g. hiring authorities) to foster a Federal workforce with more diverse perspectives on the current state of technology.  PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 19 Moving to the air, since the early 1990s, commercial UAS have operated on a limited basis in the National Airspace System (NAS).36 Until recently, UAS mainly supported government operations, such as military and border security operations. But in recent years, potential applications have rapidly expanded to include aerial photography, surveying land and crops, monitoring forest fires, responding to disasters, and inspecting critical infrastructure. Several government agencies are already operating UAS to advance their missions, and thousands of Americans have obtained the necessary authority from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) for commercial UAS operations, a process accelerated under the FAA’s “Small UAS Rule” that took effect in August 2016 and the FAA’s Small UAS Aircraft Registration Service that launched in December 2015. The FAA estimates that the number of UAS registered for commercial use will exceed 600,000 by August 2017. 37 One estimate of the economic impact of integrating of UAS into the airspace predicted more than $13.6 billion of economic value created by UAS in the first three years of integration, with sustainable growth predicted to follow. 38 A 2013 study from the Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International predicted that the commercial drone industry could generate more than $82 billion for the U.S. economy and create more than 100,000 new jobs over the next 10 years. Tax revenue to the states was predicted to increase by more than $482 million in the first decade after integration. 39 Ensuring Safety Realizing the potential benefits of these promising technologies requires that government take steps to ensure the safety of the airspace and roads, while continuing to foster a culture of innovation and growth. The United States has the safest and most complex aviation system in the world, and the public relies on FAA oversight to establish safety standards. Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSS) place requirements on manufacturers to develop safe surface vehicles, and NHTSA has the authority to recall vehicles in the event of an unreasonable risk to safety. While there is considerable opportunity to reduce the fatalities on roads and highways, current practices result in approximately one fatality for every 100 million vehicle miles traveled. Equaling or exceeding such performance in automated vehicles is a formidable challenge. Applying techniques of AI in such safety-critical environments raises several challenges. First among these is the need to translate human responsibilities while driving or flying into software. Unlike in some other successful applications of Narrow AI, there are no concise descriptions for the task of operating ground or air vehicles. Each of these operations is multifaceted, with responsibilities including guiding the vehicle, detecting and avoiding obstacles, and handing mechanical failures such as flat tires. While subtasks such as navigation or certain types of perception may align with certain existing Narrow AI solutions, the integration and prioritization of these tasks may not. It may seem straightforward to simply obey all traffic laws, but a skilled human driver may cross a double-yellow road boundary to avoid an accident or move past a double-parked vehicle. Though such situations may be rare, they cannot be 36 The National Airspace System is the network of air navigation facilities, air traffic control facilities, airports, technology, and rules and regulations that are needed to protect persons and property on the ground, and to establish a safe and efficient airspace environment for civil, commercial, and military aviation. 37 “Aerospace Forecast Report Fiscal Years 2016 to 2036,” The Federal Aviation Administration, March 24 016, https://www.faa.gov/data_research/aviation/aerospace_forecasts/media/Unmanned_Aircraft_Systems.pdf. 38 Derryl Jenkins and Bijan Vasigh, “The Economic Impact of Unmanned Aircraft Systems Integration in the United States,” The Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International, 2013, https://higherlogicdownload.s3.amazonaws.com/AUVSI/958c920a-7f9b-4ad2-9807- f9a4e95d1ef1/UploadedImages/New_Economic%20Report%202013%20Full.pdf. 39 Ibid. PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 20 ignored—simple arithmetic dictates that in order for failures to occur at least as infrequently as they do with human drivers, a system must handle many such rare cases without failure. For systems that rely on machine learning, the need to get rare cases right has implications for system design and testing. Machine learning approaches can be more confident that a case will be handled correctly if a similar case is in the training set. The challenge is how to develop a data set that includes enough of the rare cases that contribute to the risk of an accident. Commercial aviation has mechanisms for sharing incident and safety data across the industry, but reporting may not be second nature to recently credentialed UAS operators who are new to the safety and accountability culture of the traditional aviation industry. No comparable system currently exists for the automotive industry—only fatal accidents are reported, and the collection and reporting of other traffic safety information is done, if at all, in a disparate manner at the state or local level. The lack of consistently reported incident or near-miss data increases the number of miles or hours of operation necessary to establish system safety, presenting an obstacle to certain AI approaches that require extensive testing for validation. To facilitate safe testing, the FAA has designated six UAS Test Sites across the country and provided blanket authorization for UAS operations within these sites. Activities at the sites include a project to extend NASA’s multi-year research on UAS traffic management (UTM) to identify operational requirements for large-scale beyond visual line-of-sight UAS operations in low-altitude airspace. Similarly, ground vehicle testbeds such as the Connected Vehicle Pilots and the deployment of automated vehicles in Columbus, Ohio, winner of the Department of Transportation’s $40 million Smart City Challenge in 2016, will provide rich baseline and interaction data for AI researchers. Adapting Current Regulations While the regulatory approaches for the Nation’s airspace and highways differ, the approaches to integrating autonomous vehicles and aircraft share a common goal: both the FAA and NHTSA are working to establish nimble and flexible frameworks that ensure safety while encouraging innovation. With respect to airspace regulation, a significant step toward enabling the safe integration of UAS into the airspace was the FAA’s promulgation of the Part 107, or “Small UAS,” final rule, which took effect on August 29, 2016. For the first time, the rule authorizes widespread non-recreational flights of UAS under 55 pounds. The rule limits flights to daytime, at an altitude of 400 feet or less, with the vehicle controlled by a licensed operator and within the operator’s direct line of sight. Flights over people are not allowed. Subsequent rules are planned, to relax these restrictions as experience and data show how to do so safely. In particular, DOT is currently developing a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking proposing a regime for certain types of “micro UAS” to conduct operations over people, with a rule on expanded operations expected to follow. The FAA has not yet publicly announced a clear path to a regulation allowing fully autonomous40 flight. Though safe integration of autonomous aircraft into the airspace will be a complex process, the FAA is 40 This report uses the term “autonomous” for an aircraft that is controlled by a machine rather than a human. “Piloted” refers to an aircraft that has a human onboard who is controlling the aircraft. “Remotely-piloted” refers to Recommendation 7: The Department of Transportation should work with industry and researchers on ways to increase sharing of data for safety, research, and other purposes. In light of the future importance of AI in surface and air, Federal actors should focus in the near-term on developing increasingly rich sets of data, consistent with consumer privacy, that can better inform policy-making as these technologies mature. PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 21 preparing for a not-so-distant technological future in which autonomous and piloted aircraft fly together in a seamlessly integrated airspace system. New approaches to airspace management may also include AI-based enhancement of the air traffic control system. Projected future air traffic densities and diversity of operations are unlikely to be feasible within the current airspace management architecture, due to current limits on air/ground integration, and reliance on human-to-human communication in air and ground practices.41 The cost of U.S. air transportation delays in 2007, the latest year for which there is reliable public data, was estimated to be $31.2 billion—a number that has presumably grown as user volume has increased since that year. 42 Though some flight delays are unavoidable due to weather and other constraints, adopting new aviation technologies, enabling policies, and infrastructure upgrades could significantly increase efficiency of operation in the U.S. airspace. Such solutions include AI and machine learning-based architectures that have the potential to better accommodate a wider range of airspace users, including piloted and unpiloted aircraft, and to use airspace more efficiently without undermining safety. Development and deployment of such technologies would help ensure global competitiveness for airspace users and service providers, while increasing safety and reducing cost.43 With respect to surface transportation, the most significant step currently underway to establish a common framework is the Federal Automated Vehicles Policy that the Administration released on September 20, 2016. 44 The policy had several parts: x guidance for manufacturers, developers, and other organizations outlining a 15 point “Safety Assessment” for the safe design, development, testing, and deployment of highly automated vehicles; x a model state policy, which clearly distinguishes Federal and State responsibilities and recommends policy areas for states to consider, with a goal of generating a consistent national framework for the testing and operation of automated vehicles, while leaving room for experimentation by states; x an analysis of current regulatory tools that NHTSA can use to aid the safe development of automated vehicles, such as interpreting current rules to allow for appropriate flexibility in design, providing limited exemptions to allow for testing of nontraditional vehicle designs, and ensuring that unsafe automated vehicles are removed from the road; and an aircraft that is controlled by a human who is not on board. “Manned” means there is a human onboard who may or may not be in control. 41 Heinz Erzberger, “The Automated Airspace Concept,” prepared for the 4th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management R&D Seminar Dec. 3-7, 2001, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA, http://www.aviationsystemsdivision.arc.nasa.gov/publications/tactical/erzberger_12_01.pdf. 42 Michael Ball, Cynthia Barnhart, Martin Dresner, Mark Hansen, Kevin Neels, Amedeo Odoni, Everett Peterson, Lance Sherry, Antonio Trani, Bo Zou, “Total Delay Impact Study: A Comprehensive Assessment of the Costs and Impacts of Flight Delay in the United States,” The National Center of Excellence for Aviation Operations Research, November 2010, http://www.nextor.org/pubs/TDI_Report_Final_11_03_10.pdf. 43 Robert W. Poole, Jr., “The Urgent Need to Reform the FAA’s Air Traffic Control System,” The Heritage Foundation, 2007, http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2007/02/the-urgent-need-to-reform-the-faas-air-trafficcontrol-system. 44 “Federal Automated Vehicles Policy,” The U.S. Department of Transportation, September 21 2016, https://www.transportation.gov/AV. PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 22 x a discussion of new tools and authorities that the agency could consider seeking in the future to aid the safe and efficient deployment of new lifesaving technologies and ensure that technologies deployed on the road are safe. DOT intends for the guidance and the model state policy to be routinely updated as new data are learned and research completed. Recommendation 8: The U.S. Government should invest in developing and implementing an advanced and automated air traffic management system that is highly scalable, and can fully accommodate autonomous and piloted aircraft alike. Recommendation 9: The Department of Transportation should continue to develop an evolving framework for regulation to enable the safe integration of fully automated vehicles and UAS, including novel vehicle designs, into the transportation system.